Rust will make you hate JavaScript.
When I was learning Rust,
I couldn't help but notice
the same comment everywhere
by former JavaScript developers.
And this video, I'll walk you through
five key concepts
you need to understand as a JavaScript
or TypeScript developer learning rust.
If you stick around to the end,
I'll give you four foolproof steps
to start learning Rust.
Today, Rust has been the favorite
programing language for a record
eight years in a row in the StackOverflow
survey, and Rust is also infiltrating
the JavaScript ecosystem.
We've got Turbo
PAC, RS, PAC, SWC and Lightning success.
Even existing tooling is moving to rust.
Both Veit and Parcel are transitioning
critical pieces to rust
and Tailwind has planned
to move its default parser to rust.
Now aren't you curious?
Could you learn Rust
as a JavaScript developer?
It might be easier than you think.
Let's cover these five high level
concepts one by one.
I wish I would have known before learning
Rust will mostly avoid syntax for now,
but I think you'll find that
if you understand these concepts,
this syntax will come much easier to you.
The first key concept is
that rust is a compiled language.
In other words, there's
no runtime that executes Rust code.
If you're familiar with TypeScript,
it's a similar process.
Since the browser can't read TypeScript.
You use BABBEL or some other tool
to transport all your code
to vanilla JavaScript Rust doesn't target
your browser, however, but your system.
So you'll need to build your code
to compile it to a performant executable
before running it. Memory Management.
How Rust manages
Memory is one of its distinct features.
Most languages either handle memory
for you like JavaScript garbage collector,
or give you complete control
over memory management like C or C++.
These two memory choices are opposite
tradeoffs.
Garbage collected
languages are often less error prone,
as you don't typically have to worry
about seg faults.
Buffer overflows and the like.
But you sacrifice your ability to control
allocation and the allocation of memory.
Rust follows
a third option called the ownership model,
which gives you control over memory,
but puts up guardrails
to help you avoid many common pitfalls
in memory management.
You still manage the memory, but Rust
checks your choices against guiding rules.
If you violate a rule.
Rust won't compile your program.
So what are these rules?
There are two essential ones.
First, each value in rust has a variable
that's called its owner.
It's responsible for the value.
And very importantly,
there can only be one holder
or owner of each value at a time.
Here I have a string, Chris.
Currently the variable name is the owner.
I can pass that value to my function
print string,
but at that point
the function now owns the value.
And that brings us to the second rule.
When the owner goes out of scope,
the value is dropped from memory.
I can't then access the list again
in the main function.
So name owns the string,
then it's passed to print string,
which is now the new owner.
And finally, once it's printed,
the string is removed from memory.
Since its owner is out of scope
JavaScript,
the value would live on in memory
until the garbage collector clears it,
which can be ambiguous.
In rust, it's very clear
when the owner moves out of scope,
the memory is dislocated.
These rules are the special sauce
to memory management in rust.
Now I know what you're thinking.
Wait a second.
How can I ever pass any values
without changing their owners?
That's
where references and borrowing enters.
While values cannot have multiple owners.
Functions and other calls can borrow
references to values
which belong to other owners.
Again, here rust is explicit.
You add an ampersand
to a referenced value.
We're getting a little ahead of ourselves,
but borrowing a referencing of value
can happen in two different ways.
And here I think an example would help.
If I let you borrow my car, I'd expect you
to return it in the same condition
that would be immutable borrowing.
You can borrow it,
but you can't change it.
If you were my mechanic borrowing my car,
though
I may say, Hey, if you find anything
you want to improve
while you have it, go for it.
That would be a mutable reference.
In other words, you can change it
with either type of reference.
Though I'm still the owner
and you're only borrowing
in this case names
and a mutable reference.
I let the function use the string
but is not allowed to change it in any way
since the owner retains the value.
That also means I can pass a reference
twice in a row as the owner is still name.
This brings us to variables and mutability
and rust.
All variables are immutable by default.
In other words, they cannot be changed.
To mutate a variable
you have to explicitly marked as mutable
with a mute keyword.
So for instance, if you wanted to pass a
mutable reference to name, you'd add mute
and now the references mutable meaning
that print string can change the value
while it's borrowing it.
And since the variable name
still owns the string,
I can pass the mutable reference
to print string a few times in a row.
In practice,
let by itself works like constant
JavaScript while let mute works
like let and JavaScript.
Since rust is explicit, it's easy to tell
whether or not something can be mutated.
It's not dependent on the type,
like if it's an object, it's
if it has that mute keyword.
So here count cannot be modified
until I add the mute keyword.
As a JavaScript developer,
you may be a bit claustrophobic right now.
Hang in there.
We're used to changing around
nearly any variable,
but that flexibility introduces
a lot of bugs.
For example,
if you pop the last item from an array,
you've also mutated the array in place
and you just have to know
which methods mutate
in which methods copy.
Here we've mixed a specific value.
The last item in the original array
with a mutated value, the altered array
Does last item mean the last item
in the original array or the mutated one?
You'll have to manually track down
the reference
in JavaScript and rust,
though we'll see two differences.
First, you have to mark the array
with a mute keyword.
Only then can you mutate its values.
But the changes is explicit and clear.
The second difference is that you cannot
mix mutable and in mutable references.
You can either have
a single mutable reference
or any number of immutable references.
For this reason, some rust developers
call references exclusive mutable
and shared immutable.
That was a lot.
Mutability References Ownership Compiling.
Let's take a quick break
and look at a few things
that will look very familiar to you
as a JavaScript developer.
When rust was being developed,
they built its package manager cargo
based on the best parts about NPM.
So it feels very much like AMPM,
but with superpowers, it handles packages,
test running, compiling and more.
There are lots of other similarities too.
Instead of a package that JSON file,
you have a cargo dot Tamil file.
Instead of packages, you have crates
and you can explore all 130,000
plus of them at Crate Style.
An online registry like NPM Jasco.
But you'll notice
a lot of other similarities,
like the comments syntax, the structuring,
async await imports, exports and more.
Let's jump back into the overview by
looking at this fourth key concept types.
Now, if you're familiar with TypeScript,
this is going to look very similar
in syntax.
However, Rust gives you way more options
and actually enforces the types.
It's a static and strongly typed
language in plain English.
This means every value must have a type
either inferred or declared,
and that type is enforced at compile time.
Sorry,
you can't just coerce numbers into strings
whenever you feel like it
without explicitly marking that change.
Like TypeScript.
Rust can often infer types for you,
for instance.
It can infer that my NUM is an I30 too,
and my name is a string slice.
While using
the inferred types is often sufficient,
you can provide more direction
with an explicit declaration in rust
gives you lots of options.
You don't need to know them all by heart
when you first start learning.
But as a brief example,
instead of the single number
in typescript,
Rust gives you size specific options
for integers and floating points.
So that's what,
more than 20 different number types,
four type scripts, one number type.
But what you can control
how much memory is reserved with each type
instead of the inferred I30 two,
which reserved space for numbers
from about -2 million to positive 2
million as the IE means sign.
In other words,
it can be positive or negative.
I can type this number as a U.
Eight which reserves space for a number
from only zero
to positive to 55 as the U means unsigned.
That's quite a memory improvement.
There are lots of other types
like structs,
which are custom data types that look and
act very similar to JavaScript objects.
Enemies which are lists,
a fixed named values and more.
Again, the specific syntax here
isn't super important at this stage
in your journey.
Just know that you have to give everything
a type, either explicitly or implicitly,
and that you have lots of options.
This also means there's no any in rust.
Sorry, I know.
And there's not even a null type.
That's because rust forces you to handle
all possible errors at compile time.
And that's our final topic. Error handling
No language
removes the possibility of errors,
but rust forces you to handle them.
Rust divides
all errors into two categories
unrecoverable and recoverable
unrecoverable errors are errors
that should stop your program,
which rust will do with a panic macro.
Your program will stop immediately
and produce a trace to the here
for recoverable errors.
Rust provides lots of tools to force you
to handle any possible issues.
Let's talk about just two matching
and the result type.
We'll call the divide function
and pass into integers.
Note the match keyword matches
like a switch statement,
but it forces you to exhaustively handle
all possible cases.
When the divide function runs
will get back a result type,
which has two possibilities.
Okay.
Or error
and this example will log either option.
The divide function then returns an error
if trying to divide by zero
and the result for any other value.
You may notice that you don't have to say
return the final expressions
and both the F and else blocks
return automatically.
Understanding
these five conceptual differences
will prime the path
for your learning rust.
Now I promise you for learning steps.
Unlike the jungle of YouTube videos,
random MDMA docs and coding tutorials
with 20 ways to do everything a JavaScript
and this is going to blow your mind.
Rust gives you a defined learning path.
Start by going to rust lang dawgs learn.
Here you'll see three steps.
The book is a comprehensive
getting started guide for the Language.
There's even a new interactive,
self-guided version of the book
with quizzes and fun projects
along the way.
Second, there's
an official course that focuses on syntax
and runs directly in your terminal.
You can even run it in your browser.
Solve each syntax error
to move to the next level.
Third, rust
by example is a collection of examples
that show how rust works in practice.
Each example is heavily documented
to walk you through the concepts
using actual code examples.
Before I mention
one final step for learning Rust
did you know that there's official editor
tooling with helpful tips,
display errors and more
you'll write into your favorite editor.
Rust also includes a built in formatter
that acts like prettier a letter
that works like s lint.
And since rust is static
and strongly typed,
every crate has full documentation
at docs dot.
Rust feels safe to write
because it has clear guidance
and strong opinions and how you should
learn, write and run your rust code.
The fourth and final tool
is the standard library documentation.
It's famous for its clear
description of all built in rust applets.
If you ever get stuck, this example
rich guide will have the answers
and teach you rust along the way.
So there you have it
A brief survey of the concepts
you'll need to understand
as a JavaScript developer.
Learning rust
along with a clear learning path.
Once you learn rust, spin up a full stack
website with laptops or rocket build
a command line tool with clop, make a game
with amethyst or anything else.
And if you're interested in more tutorials
on Rust, let us know below.
Thanks for watching.